Task 1 : introduction

🖥️ 1️⃣ Desktop

Desktop হলো Windows-এর main workspace।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

App / file / folder shortcut রাখা

Quickly program open করা

Recycle Bin access করা

Right-click করে:

New folder

Display settings

Personalize

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Desktop আসলে user profile-এর অংশ

C:\Users\Username\Desktop


Desktop-এ যা রাখো → সেটা ওই folder-এ save হয়

📁 2️⃣ File System

File System হলো Windows-এর ভিতরের structure যেখানে সব data থাকে।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

File create / delete / rename

Folder manage করা

Drive (C:, D:) access

File permission set করা

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Root drive → C:\

Important folders:

C:\Windows → OS files

C:\Users → user data

System32 → critical system tools

👤 3️⃣ User Account Control (UAC)

UAC হলো Windows-এর security feature।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

System-level change confirm করা

Malware থেকে protection

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Admin হলেও সবসময় full power দেয় না

Risky কাজ করলে:

UAC prompt আসে

Password / Yes-No confirmation চায়

Shield icon 🛡️ মানে → admin permission লাগবে

⚙️ 4️⃣ Control Panel

Control Panel হলো traditional system settings hub।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

Program uninstall

User account manage

Network settings change

Hardware / printer add

Advanced system config

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Classic interface

Detailed & complex settings

অনেক সময় Settings থেকে redirect হয়ে এখানে আসে

⚙️ 5️⃣ Settings

Settings হলো modern configuration menu।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

Display / Sound / Wallpaper change

Wi-Fi / Internet manage

Update & Security

Privacy settings

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Windows 8 থেকে চালু

Touch-friendly & user-friendly

Simple settings এখানেই বেশি থাকে

📊 6️⃣ Task Manager

Task Manager দিয়ে system performance ও running apps দেখা যায়।

🔹 দিয়ে কী করা যায়

Running program end করা

CPU / RAM / Disk usage দেখা

Startup app enable/disable

User session monitor করা

🔹 কীভাবে কাজ করে

Shortcut:

Ctrl + Shift + Esc


System real-time data দেখায়

Hanging app force close করা যায়

🔑 সব মিলিয়ে এক লাইনের summary

Desktop → কাজের জায়গা

File System → data structure

UAC → security guard

Control Panel → advanced settings

Settings → easy settings

Task Manager → system monitor







task 2 : System Configuration and Advanced System Settings
1️⃣ System Configuration (MSConfig)

Purpose: Advanced troubleshooting, diagnose startup issues

Access: Start Menu → type msconfig → open (local admin rights লাগবে)

Tabs & কাজ:

General → Decide কোন services & devices boot এ load হবে

Options:

Normal → সব load করবে

Diagnostic → minimum load (like safe mode)

Selective → specific service/device select করা যাবে

Boot → OS boot options configure করা (Safe Mode, timeout, etc.)

Services → সব system services list করে (running/stopped)

Service = background program

Exam Answer: Manufacturer = Sysinternals → PsShutdown

Startup → Startup apps manage করা

Windows Server → empty

Check startup apps → Run → shell:startup

Tools → Quick access to various utilities

Shows launch command → run via Run or Command Prompt

2️⃣ Advanced System Settings

Purpose: Performance, virtual memory, system recovery control করা

Access: Start → search View advanced system settings

Performance Options:

Page File: RAM full হলে virtual memory হিসেবে ব্যবহার হয়

Details: drive, initial size, max size, auto-managed

Startup and Recovery:

Configure crash dump (Blue Screen / critical error)

Dump types:

Automatic memory dump

Kernel memory dump

Small memory dump (256 KB)

Complete memory dump

None

Helps troubleshoot crashes

3️⃣ Windows Services

Purpose: Background apps that support OS functionality

Access: MSConfig → Services tab

Answer / Exam: PsShutdown

Explanation:

Manufacturer = Sysinternals

Service name (one word) needed, not display name

4️⃣ Windows License

Purpose: Shows who Windows is registered to

Access: System Properties → Windows activation

Answer: Windows User

5️⃣ Windows Troubleshooting Command

Purpose: Troubleshooting tools open করা

Command:

C:\Windows\System32\control.exe /name Microsoft.Troubleshooting


Explanation:

control.exe → Control Panel launcher

/name Microsoft.Troubleshooting → direct to Troubleshooting

6️⃣ Control Panel Command

Purpose: Open Control Panel directly

Command: control.exe

Note: Only .exe name, full path দরকার নেই

7️⃣ User Account Control (UAC)

Purpose: Protect system from unwanted admin changes

Access: Start → search UAC → Change User Account Control settings

How it works:

Even admin accounts run non-elevated by default

Higher privileges চাইলে → prompt আসে

Example: Install program → UAC prompt

Steps:

Open UAC settings

Move slider (notify level adjust)

Click OK + confirm

✅ Quick Exam-Ready Answers Table
Question	Answer	Explanation
Service Manufacturer = Sysinternals	PsShutdown	MSConfig → Services tab; one word = Service Name
Windows License Registered To	Windows User	System Properties → Activation info
Windows Troubleshooting Command	C:\Windows\System32\control.exe /name Microsoft.Troubleshooting	Open Troubleshooting directly
Control Panel Command	control.exe	Open Control Panel directly
Change UAC Settings	Task 3	Adjust slider to control admin prompts





Task 3: Change UAC Settings
What is the command to open User Account Control Settings? (The answer is the name of the .exe file, not the full path)
UserAccountControlSettings.exe




Task 4 : Computer Management
🪟 Windows Computer Management – Notes
🔹 Computer Management (compmgmt.msc)

Computer Management is a Windows administrative tool used to manage system components from a single console.

Sections:

System Tools

Storage

Services and Applications

1️⃣ System Tools
📌 Task Scheduler

Used to create, manage, and monitor scheduled tasks

Tasks can run:

At log on / log off

On a schedule (daily, every 5 minutes, etc.)

One-time only

Tasks can run applications, scripts, or commands

Important Example:

npcapwatchdog task

Purpose: Monitors Npcap service

Trigger: At log on

📌 Event Viewer

Used to view system logs and events

Helps in:

Troubleshooting errors

Security auditing

System activity analysis

Event Viewer Panes:

Left → Event log tree

Middle → Event details

Right → Actions

Common Event Types:

Error

Warning

Information

Audit Success

Audit Failure

📌 Shared Folders

Displays shared resources on the system

Subsections:

Shares → List of shared folders

Sessions → Users connected to shares

Open Files → Files accessed by users

Hidden Shared Folder Example:

C$


Default Windows administrative share

$ indicates hidden share

📌 Local Users and Groups

Manage local users and groups

Tool: lusrmgr.msc

Used to assign permissions and roles

📌 Performance Monitor (perfmon)

Monitors system performance:

CPU

Memory

Disk

Network

Supports real-time monitoring and log analysis

📌 Device Manager

View and manage hardware devices

Tasks:

Enable/disable devices

Update drivers

2️⃣ Storage
📌 Disk Management

Used for advanced storage configuration:

Create or delete partitions

Extend or shrink partitions

Assign or change drive letters

Initialize new disks

3️⃣ Services and Applications
📌 Services

Background applications running on the system

View service status and configuration

Startup Types:

Automatic → Starts on system boot

Manual → Starts when triggered

Disabled → Never starts

📌 WMI Control

Manages Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI)

Allows system management via scripts and PowerShell

WMIC is deprecated (PowerShell recommended)

✅ Exam / Lab Answers
Command to open Computer Management:
compmgmt.msc

When is the npcapwatchdog scheduled task set to run?
At log on

Name of the hidden folder that is shared:
C$

🔑 Quick Notes

Hidden shares end with $

Task Scheduler → Properties → Triggers = find task schedule

Disk Management is the only safe way to manage partitions

Services control background system behavior





Task 5 : System Information
1️⃣ System Information Tool

Msinfo32.exe = Microsoft System Information tool

Purpose: Computer-এর hardware, system components, এবং software environment সম্পর্কে detailed তথ্য দেখানো।

Use: Diagnose computer issues, troubleshoot, বা configuration চেক করা।

How to Open:

Run → msinfo32.exe

অথবা Start → search System Information

2️⃣ Sections in System Summary
1. Hardware Resources

Shows low-level system details: IRQ, memory ranges, DMA, I/O ports

Mostly advanced users/engineers use this

Average user usually doesn’t need this

2. Components

Shows installed hardware devices

Examples:

Display → graphics card info

Input → keyboard, mouse info

Some sections may be empty depending on installed hardware

3. Software Environment

Shows OS-integrated and installed software

Other details:

Environment Variables

Network Connections

Environment Variables = variables that store OS-related paths and settings

Example:

%WINDIR% → location of Windows installation

%ComSpec% → path to command interpreter (cmd.exe)

Where to find Environment Variables:

Control Panel → System and Security → System → Advanced system settings → Environment Variables

Settings → System → About → System Info → Advanced system settings → Environment Variables

3️⃣ Search in msinfo32

Bottom of msinfo32 utility → search bar

Example: Select Components → search IP address

Shows IP configuration of the computer

✅ Quick Answers (Exam/VM)
Question	Answer	Explanation
Command to open System Information	msinfo32.exe	.exe file opens full System Information utility
System Name	Depends on VM, usually something like WIN-VM12345	System Name = computer’s hostname in Windows
Value for ComSpec	C:\Windows\System32\cmd.exe	Path to command interpreter, used to run commands
🔑 Key Points

Msinfo32 gives a full snapshot of hardware + software environment

Environment Variables tell programs where system files and tools are

ComSpec specifically points to cmd.exe (Windows Command Prompt)

Search bar in Components → easy way to find specific info like IP address






Task 6 : Resource Monitor
1️⃣ Resource Monitor কী?

Resource Monitor (resmon.exe) = Windows এর advanced utility

দেখায় CPU, memory, disk, network usage per process এবং aggregate (total) level-এ

Advanced users বা IT professionals এর জন্য যাদের troubleshooting করতে হয়

Key Features:

কোন process কোন file/handle/module ব্যবহার করছে তা দেখানো

Advanced filtering → এক বা একাধিক process আলাদা করে দেখা

Services start / stop / pause / resume করা

Unresponsive applications বন্ধ করা

Deadlocked processes বা file-lock conflicts চিনহিত করা → problem solve করার জন্য

2️⃣ Overview Tab Structure

Resource Monitor খোলার পর Overview tab এ চারটি main section থাকে:

Section	Function
CPU	CPU usage per process, threads, overall load
Memory	RAM usage per process, total memory usage, commit charge
Disk	Disk read/write activity, which files are being accessed
Network	Network bandwidth usage, per process data transfer

এই চারটি section Tabs হিসাবেও উপরে থাকে → individual analysis এর জন্য

Right pane → graphical real-time view

3️⃣ Key Learnings / Takeaways

Resource Monitor advanced troubleshooting এর জন্য → normal user সাধারণত না দেখে

ব্যবহার করে জানতে পারো:

কোন process CPU/Memory বেশি use করছে

কোন file বা network resource কোন process use করছে

Deadlock / file lock সমস্যার source কে

Resmon real-time data + filtering এর মাধ্যমে সমস্যা শনাক্ত করতে সাহায্য করে

✅ Summary (What you learned from this section)

Resource Monitor = Advanced Windows tool for CPU, Memory, Disk, Network monitoring

Allows per-process monitoring and system-wide resource overview

Can manage processes & services → stop, start, pause, resume

Helps identify deadlocks, unresponsive applications, file lock conflicts

Overview tab → CPU / Memory / Disk / Network sections

Right pane → real-time graphical visualization







Task 7 : Command Prompt
1️⃣ Command Prompt কী?

cmd / Command Prompt = Windows-এর text-based interface

GUI (Graphical User Interface) এর আগে, command line ছিল সকল কাজের মূল উপায়

GUI আসার পর সাধারণ কাজ button click-এ হয়ে গেল, কিন্তু advanced users এখনও cmd দিয়ে কমান্ড চালাতে পারে

Purpose:

Computer information retrieve করা

Troubleshooting

Networking info check করা

System management (user, groups, services, etc.)

2️⃣ Basic Commands
a) hostname

Shows the computer name

Example:

C:\> hostname
WIN-VM12345

b) whoami

Shows the currently logged-in user

Example:

C:\> whoami
WIN-VM12345\Administrator

3️⃣ Networking Commands
a) ipconfig

Shows network address settings, e.g., IP address, subnet mask, gateway

Example:

C:\> ipconfig


Help manual:

C:\> ipconfig /?


→ Explains all possible parameters for ipconfig

b) netstat

Shows protocol statistics + current TCP/IP connections

Can use parameters:

netstat -a → all connections and listening ports

netstat -b → shows executable involved

netstat -e → ethernet statistics

4️⃣ Managing network resources with net command

net command = Manage network resources like users, shares, sessions

Sub-commands: user, localgroup, use, share, session

To get help for net command:

C:\> net help
C:\> net help user


/?" doesn't work here, so we use net help` syntax

5️⃣ Other Useful Commands
cls

Clears the screen in command prompt

C:\> cls

6️⃣ Key Points / Takeaways

Command Prompt = Text interface to control Windows

GUI makes things easy, but cmd gives more control for advanced users

Useful commands covered:

hostname → computer name

whoami → logged-in user

ipconfig → network info

netstat → TCP/IP & protocol stats

net → manage network resources

cls → clear screen

Every command has a help manual → usually /?"

Exception: net → net help

💡 Tip:

Experiment with commands + parameters (ipconfig /all, netstat -an) → বোঝা যাবে কিভাবে output change হয়

Command Prompt is very powerful for system diagnostics and troubleshooting




task 8  : Registry Editor
1️⃣ Windows Registry কী?

Registry হলো Windows-এর central hierarchical database।

এখানে সব system configuration এবং user settings stored থাকে।

Microsoft অনুযায়ী, এটি ব্যবহার হয় system configure করার জন্য এক বা একাধিক user, application, এবং hardware device এর জন্য।

2️⃣ Registry কি ধরনের তথ্য রাখে?

User Profiles

প্রতিটি user এর settings এবং preferences এখানে থাকে।

উদাহরণ: Desktop background, theme, shortcuts ইত্যাদি।

Installed Applications

কোন কোন application installed আছে এবং কোন document types open করতে পারে তা।

উদাহরণ: Word installs → .docx file type associate।

Property Sheet Settings

Folder এবং application icons এর settings।

উদাহরণ: Folder view (list, details, icons)।

Hardware Configuration

কোন hardware installed আছে।

কোন ports ব্যবহার হচ্ছে।

3️⃣ Warning / Caution

Registry advanced users-এর জন্য।

ভুল changes করলে system unstable বা unbootable হতে পারে।

Always backup registry before making changes।

4️⃣ Registry Access / Editing

Registry edit করতে হয় Registry Editor দিয়ে।

Command:

regedit.exe


Run (Win + R) বা Command Prompt থেকে চালানো যায়।

Takeaways

Registry = Windows এর core configuration hub।

User, application, hardware, and system settings সবই এখানে থাকে।

Careful editing = system customization possible

Careless editing = system crash

💡 Tip: Registry Explorer/Editor এ changes করার আগে সবসময় export / backup করে নাও।



task 9 :  conclutions
1️⃣ Context

আমরা যে room এ আছি, সেখানে MSConfig (System Configuration) থেকে accessible কিছু tools আলোচনা করা হয়েছে।

Tools examples: System Information (msinfo32), Resource Monitor (resmon), Task Scheduler, Registry Editor (regedit), Computer Management (compmgmt) ইত্যাদি।

2️⃣ Key Points

Direct Access without MSConfig

MSConfig খুলে না দিয়েও এই tools গুলো run করা যায়।

উদাহরণ:

msinfo32.exe → System Information

resmon.exe → Resource Monitor

regedit.exe → Registry Editor

compmgmt.msc → Computer Management

Start Menu Access

অনেক tools Start Menu থেকেও সরাসরি access করা যায়।

উদাহরণ: Start → search → type Resource Monitor বা Registry Editor

Other Tools

MSConfig এ অনেক tools আছে যেগুলো এখানে আলোচনা করা হয়নি।

কিছু tools Windows Fundamentals 1 এ কভার করা হয়েছে।

কিছু tools তোমার জন্য self-explore এর জন্য রাখা হয়েছে।
